[MUSIC]
Let's now look at how we might use
hierarchical modeling to extend a linear
model.
Recall that our linear model for
infant mortality looked like this.
Response yi given
the explanatory variables for
country i, the beta coefficients and
the variants came
independently from a normal
distribution with mean beta
naught plus beta 1 times x1i
plus beta 2 times x2i and
variance sigma squared,
for country i in 1 up to n.
Here, yi is the log of infant
mortality for country i.
x1i is the log of per capita income for
country i.
And x2i is an indicator that
the country exports oil.
We haven't yet incorporated information
about where the country is located,
which may also help explain some of
the variability in infant mortality.
There's another variable in
the data set called region.
And it seems reasonable that countries in
the same region may be correlated with
one another rather than independent which
is what the current linear model assumes.
One way we can do this is
through the intercept.
We're going to use what's called
a random intercept model.
Rather than place a standard
prior on beta naught e intercept,
we can let each region
have its own intercept.
And then the group of intercepts will
come from a common distribution.
So, to illustrate, we're going to
change the name of beta naught,
the intercept, to alpha.
We'll write the model like this,
yi given the region of country I,
as well as the other
explanatory variables,
the alpha parameters,
the beta parameters and sigma squared.
In fact we only need to condition on the
one alpha that corresponds to country i.
But given all of these,
yi is independent normal
with mean alpha sub ri
plus beta 1x1i plus beta
2x2i, variance sigma squared.
Now, the r sub Is will be one of
the numbers one up to capital R,
the number of regions.
And as usual, I will go from 1 up to n.
Here alpha is indexed by R.
Which is a number that indicates
which region country i is in.
So for example if country i is in
region four, then our sub i will be
equal to 4 and the intercept for
y sub i will be alpha sub 4.
In the next level,
we have the alpha sub r,
given hyper parameters Mu and Tau squared,
will be iid from a normal distribution
with mean Mu and variance Tau squared.
This will be for region 1 up to capital R.
To complete the hierarchical model,
we need prior distributions also for
the betas, for sigma squared,
for Mu, and for Tau squared.
Mu represents the mean of
the intercepts across all regions and
tau squared represents the variability
of the intercepts across regions.
How much they differ from
one region to the next.
In addition to inducing correlation and
why among the countries
in the same region.
These parameters can be estimated
from their posterior distributions.
They may be interesting
to researchers above and
beyond just the beta
coefficient parameters.
The graphical model representation
of this hierarchical model
could be written like this.
At the top level we have Mu and
Tau squared and
for simplicity, I'm going to write all
of the alphas on a plate together.
So this is alpha r for
rn1 up to capital R.
The alphas depend on Mu and Tau squared.
And at the same level as the Taus, or, I'm
sorry, at the same level as the alphas,
we have parameter beta 1,
beta 2, and sigma squared.
Underneath these, we have the plate for
the data, so we have y sub i,
which is observed.
Then we have the region for country i and
I'm going to make this a square
because it's not random,
we don't place a prior distribution
on r or either of the xs.
So I'll put double squares on those.
And this is for country i and 1 up to n.
Now, the yis depend on all
of the observed covariants,
as well as on alphas,
betas, and sigma squared.
In this drawing,
it would be more correct to draw
the alpha sub r parameter separately.
Each affecting their own
respective set of yi variables.
Here we drew arrows from all
the the alphas affecting yi, but
of course only one of them actually does.
This drawing at least helps us to
visualize the levels of the hierarchy.
We could easily envision
other hierarchical models,
such as ones that place hierarchy
on the beta coefficients.
For example, if we use the region
variable to index beta 1 as we did with
the intercepts, this will indicate
our belief that the coefficient or
the effect of income on infant
mortality is different for each region.
But these effects are related and
come from a common distribution.
For now, we're going to focus on
the random intercept only model.
[MUSIC]